"Focusable element has no keyboard trap via standard navigation" [a1b64e]: fix Failed example and add clarification (#1905)
auto-wcag/auto-wcag: _rules/focusable-no-keyboard-trap-standard-nav-a1b64e.md

For each target element, focus can cycle to the browser UI by using [standard keyboard navigation](#standard-keyboard-navigation).

> **Note:** It is not possible to fulfill this expectation by using browser specific shortcuts to return to the browser UI.

Reviewer: I'm not so sure that things that can only be exited with shift+tab should pass this SC. I think we need to get clarity on that. This note shouldn't have been a note. Knowing whether its backward, forward, or both needs to be in the expectation, but then by taking this out of the note without changing the expectation we're making the rule less clear.

Author: > This note shouldn't have been a note. 

Which is why we upgrade it to an Assumption 😁 

The "one way is enough" view has been discussed on [CG call on July 14th](https://www.w3.org/2022/07/14-act-r-minutes.html#item05), check also the [action point summary](https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/issues/1885#issuecomment-1184535392).

---
Thus said, I do agree that our definition of "standard keyboard navigation" lists 6 keys (or combination) and the expectation is not fully clear whether one of these is enough (technically, it is because the def is "one or more of [these 6 keys]", so cycling back to UI using only one of the listed method does fulfil the definition).

> For each target element, focus can cycle to the browser UI by using [standard keyboard navigation](#standard-keyboard-navigation).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each target element, focus can be moved away from that element using only [standard keyboard navigation](#standard-keyboard-navigation).
```

I would suggest a better adherence with SC ([2.1.2: No Keyboard Trap](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/no-keyboard-trap.html)). 
- "focus can cycle to the browser UI" is related to the entire flattened tabindex ordered focus navigation scope, not to the single target element;
- "focus can cycle to the browser UI" navigating on Safari with the TAB, focus moves from the last tabbable element to the body element, skipping the "Browser UI". On the contrary, navigating backward (SHIFT+TAB) focus can be moved to the address-bar. Anyway, the new proposal should avoid any confusion.

Author: I'm a bit reluctant to change the expectation in this PR 🤔 Especially since that changes its scope quite a bit.
Can you open an issue for that? And we'll take it in a separate PR.

## Background

> [Standard keyboard navigation](#standard-keyboard-navigation) can move focus both forward and backward. Therefore, cycling back to the browser UI can be done both by moving forward through the tab order and by moving backwards. It is not fully clear whether [Success Criterion 2.1.2 No keyboard trap][sc212] requires navigation in both directions. Therefore, this rule does not constrain navigation direction, to stay on the safe side.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Standard keyboard navigation](#standard-keyboard-navigation) can move focus both forward and backward. Therefore, cycling back to the browser UI can be done both by moving forward through the tab order and by moving backwards. It is not fully clear whether [Success Criterion 2.1.2 No keyboard trap][sc212] requires navigation in both directions. Therefore, to stay on the safe side, this rule does not constrain navigation direction.
```

> [Standard keyboard navigation](#standard-keyboard-navigation) can move focus both forward and backward. Therefore, cycling back to the browser UI can be done both by moving forward through the tab order and by moving backwards. It is not fully clear whether [Success Criterion 2.1.2 No keyboard trap][sc212] requires navigation in both directions. Therefore, to stay on the safe side, this rule does not constrain navigation direction.

Reviewer: This is an assumption. I think we put it there. Also, might be good to open an issue with AGWG to just ask this question.

My recollection of this though was that we'd said that forward navigation was required, but backward navigation was not. Am I misremembering that?

Author: > My recollection of this though was that we'd said that forward navigation was required, but backward navigation was not. Am I misremembering that?

As per [CG discussion of July 14th](https://www.w3.org/2022/07/14-act-r-minutes.html#item05) and the following [summary of action](https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/issues/1885#issuecomment-1184535392), we decided that either forward or backward was enough (to stay on the safe side).

I agree this should be an Asumption 👍

Author: > This is an assumption. I think we put it there. Also, might be good to open an issue with AGWG to just ask this question.

https://github.com/w3c/wcag/issues/2678

Putting this on hold, waiting to see if we have an answer.

#### Failed Example 1

This [focusable][] element creates a keyboard trap bringing focus to the `button`. Note that if one of the links is removed, the focus may jump to the browser UI before the timeout expires, at which point the `this.focus()` trap cannot trigger anymore.

```html
<a href="#">Link 1</a>
<button onblur="setTimeout(() => this.focus(), 10)">
	Button1
</button>

> <a href="#">Link 1</a>

Reviewer 2: Irrelevant for understanding, but...

According to [focusable](https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/act/rules/a1b64e/proposed/#focusable) definition

> Exception: Elements that lose focus during a period of up to 1 second after gaining focus, without the user interacting with the page the element is on, are not considered focusable.

when focus is on the button element, first link (navigating backward) and second link (navigating forward) are not considered focusable. So in this scenario, when focus is on the "button" element, we've just one "focusable" element within the page that is the button itself. 

Should we replace "[focusable][]" with "part of [sequential focus navigation](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#sequential-focus-navigation)" in Applicability?

Reviewer 2: @Jym77, per your answer above, I'm opening a new issue.

Author: I don't think that's needed 🤔 
I agree it is a bit weird that the focusability of the links depends on the state of the page (they are "focusable" only if the button isn't currently focused…) That's more a problem with the definition, I'd say.

But in any cases, the button still has a keyboard trap sa defined by this rule (focus can't move away).

> <a href="#">Link 1</a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<a href="#">Link 2</a>
```

Reviewer 4: I agree with Wilco's suggested change.
